In 2016, Hafthor Björnsson, one of the
strongest humans on the planet,
>> [music]
>> asked me to be his coach. And I said yes
immediately.
>> to be very helpful to have a coach here
if it was in order.
Awesome to have you here, my friend.
>> My pleasure. Helps a lot and
things like that.
Yeah, it's just awesome, you know.
>> That should sound insane because even a
couple of years earlier, I wouldn't have
had the confidence to say yes. He would
have felt completely out of my league
and for most coaches, a question like
that still would be. At that point, I
didn't have the reputation, the
platform, or the resume that I have now.
I wasn't special or gifted. I was just a
coach who had learned some very
important lessons the hard way. The
reason I could say yes with complete
conviction [music]
was the lessons that I had learned from
three of the best strength coaches in
history. And their lessons removed the
guesswork from my coaching. In this
video, I'm going to teach [music] you
three of the most valuable lessons that
I learned from Al Vermeil, Charles
Poliquin, and Ernie Lillibridge Sr. So
that you can apply the same way of
thinking to your own athlete or yourself
and save yourself years of trial and
error. Let's start with how I met Thor
in 2016. A company called SodaStream
contacted me about hosting a seminar
with Hafthor Björnsson. Their goal was
to invite a bunch of fitness
influencers, run a live seminar, and
generate exposure around the event. My
wife and her sister were invited as
guests, and SodaStream needed a facility
and a co-presenter to help run the
seminar alongside Thor. They asked me to
be that person. They even paid me, and I
would have done it for free, but don't
tell them that I said that. They warned
me beforehand. They said that Thor was
intimidating, didn't speak much English,
and that I'd likely need to take control
of the entire presentation. I told them
not to worry. I had it covered. At the
time, my gym was a passion project that
I completely overcapitalized.
>> center and center for weight lifting.
This is all going to be black rubber
platform. This is where our monolift is
going to go.
All of our machines, everything like
that, it's going to be in this section.
Everywhere you see timber, it's going to
be rubber flooring. I bought the best
equipment that money could buy and
nearly broke myself financially doing
it, but that's a story for another time.
What mattered was that my gym reflected
exactly how I approach training. I told
them that Thor didn't need to speak
English. Once he walked into my gym, it
would speak his language. And as for
hosting the seminar, that's what I do.
Thor walked in smiling. I showed him
around the gym and explained the plan
for the day. I'd done my research. I
knew his numbers and what he was capable
of. It was clear that he was relieved.
All he had to do was stand there and be
Thor, and I would handle the rest.
During the seminar, we got to the bench
press. I asked Thor how much he could
bench, and he answered 230 kg. I turned
to the audience and said, "That's five
blue plates on each side plus another 5
kg. Hands up if anyone here can do
that." Everyone laughed and shook their
heads until my wife called out, "You
can." She was right. 230 kg was exactly
what I'd just benched in competition.
This wasn't planned. I wasn't trying to
measure myself against a 6'9" 200 kg
giant from Iceland. Out of the corner of
my eye, I saw Thor turn and look at me.
He raised his hand like he was a student
in the classroom, and he asked,
"Sebastian, can I try this technique?"
That was unexpected, but I was pretty
excited to teach Thor Björnsson my
methods. I warmed him up, and right
there in front of the group, he bench
pressed 235 kg for two reps.
That night, we took out Thor and his
friend that he brought from Iceland,
Gretar, out for dinner. That's when he
asked me to be his coach. My answer was
immediate. I'd never coached a strongman
before, but I knew exactly what to do.
The same thing that I do for every
athlete. Build a strong, resilient,
structurally sound body, make it move
well, keep it healthy, and then layer
the sport on top. When Thor asked what I
would charge, I said nothing. Instead, I
said this. "When I make you number one
in the world, let's sell the programs
that we used to make you go number one,
and then we split the profits 50/50."
Thor accepted the offer, not because it
saved him money. He was already
investing heavily in the pursuit to
being the best. What mattered was my
conviction. I was willing to put my
reputation and future income on the line
because I knew my methods worked. I'm
not delusional. Thor was already one of
the strongest humans on the planet
before I even met him. But what follows
explains exactly why I trusted the
process enough to guarantee the outcome.
What I'm about to share are three of the
most important training concepts that
I'd learned in my career that gave me
the confidence to coach Thor. First
concept, strength training is not sport
practice. The first major concept that
gave me confidence came from an
interview that I'd heard from Al
Vermeil. Al Vermeil was the strength
coach for the Chicago Bulls during the
Michael Jordan era. He also coached the
San Francisco 49ers at the time that
they won the Super Bowl. He's the only
strength coach in history to hold
championship rings from two different
major league sports. He was asked the
question, "How do you train different
athletes from different sports
differently to each other?" And his
answer was, "I don't." He went on to say
that the job of the athlete is to get
there the fastest with the most. The
skills coach teaches the sport. The
strength coach builds a body that's
strong, moves well, and stays free from
injury. That statement completely
reframed my role. Early in my career,
like many coaches, I tried to imitate
the sports in the gym. I'd add load to
the movements that I saw on the field.
The problem is that most sports skills
are too fast, too reactive, and too
variable to be recreated accurately
under meaningful load. Once load changes
speed, timing, or sequencing, you're no
longer training the same skill. Skill
improves by practicing the skill.
Strength training exists to build
capacity. The goal is not to look sports
specific in the gym. The goal is to
build an athlete who can tolerate the
demands of the sport without breaking.
This lesson gave me so much confidence
to trust that my job was not to coach
the sport, but to build the body.
Concept two, structural balance and
world-class program design. I learned
the concept of structural balance years
before I'd ever coached elite athletes.
It came from one of my early mentors,
Charles Poliquin. Charles taught me one
of the most practical ways to think
about exercise selection in program
design, and it was this idea of
structural balance. The bench press was
the benchmark, treated as 100%, and then
a range of other upper body lifts were
expected to sit at certain percentages
of the bench press number. For example,
if the bench press was 100%, then a
preacher curl was expected to be roughly
48% for one rep max, and a dumbbell
external rotation was expected to be
roughly 9.8% for eight reps. There were
many other upper body lifts with their
own standards, all expressed as
percentages of that bench press. The
idea was that if any of those supporting
lifts were significantly lower than its
expected percentage, it would expose a
weak point that could limit performance.
Bring up that weak point, and the bench
press often improved without having to
obsess over the bench press itself. The
lower body followed a similar principle,
but with its own set of rules. Rather
than being anchored to a single lift in
the same way, the focus was on achieving
structural balance in musculature and
strength so that no single weakness
limited overall strength potential.
Early in my career, I tested this
concept aggressively with general
population clients. I tested their bench
press, identified their weak points, and
then I ran phases where I'd focus
heavily on those weak points, sometimes
even removing the bench press entirely.
I want to be clear here, that was my
interpretation, not Charles'
recommendation. At the time, I was
trying to prove to myself whether those
percentages and ratios really mattered.
With beginners, it worked. Their bench
press improved even without benching
because training age was low and almost
anything productive moved the needle. As
I started coaching stronger athletes,
that approach stopped making sense. The
more advanced the athlete, the greater
the demand for specificity. You can't
remove the main movement and expect it
to keep improving at the highest level.
Over time, I also moved away from
chasing rigid percentages for another
reason. At the highest level, perfect
balance is neither realistic nor
desirable. Elite performers are
imbalanced by necessity. Whatever their
main goal is must be disproportionately
developed compared to everything else.
Structural balance still matters, but
its role is not to force symmetry. Its
role is to prevent weaknesses from
limiting progression while still
allowing performance to be prioritized
when it mattered most. After more than
20 years in the industry, the most
practical way that I found to apply
structural balance was to use an
eight-category model. For the upper
body, we have the horizontal push and
pull and the vertical push and pull. For
the lower body, we have a hip-dominant
squat pattern, a knee-dominant squat
pattern, and then for the posterior
chain, we have a hip hinge and knee
flexion, which is the two main functions
of the hamstrings. Structural balance is
achieved by allocating an equal total
number of working sets to each of the
eight categories. Applied consistently,
this gives the greatest chance of
building a body that is balanced enough
to stay healthy, tolerate high training
loads, and continue progressing
long-term. For most of the training
year, equal emphasis across those eight
categories keeps the athlete resilient
and capable. As competition approaches,
specificity takes priority, and
imbalances emerge naturally as a result
of being exceptionally good at the task
that matters most. Following this
framework gave me the confidence that I
could design world-class programs for
anyone. Third concept, the rules change
as you get stronger. In 2014, I spent a
month working closely with Ernie
Lillibridge Sr. and his son, Eric
Lillibridge, known as Team Lillibridge.
They were in Sydney for a world
championship. During that time, we
toured together, ran seminars together,
trained, and worked together daily.
Ernie Sr. was a world record holder
himself and coached both his sons to
world records. Eric Lillebridge was the
140 kg world champion with a 477.5
kg squat. They also had a team of
world-class powerlifters, which showed
me that the system worked repeatedly. It
wasn't a one-off success, nor was it the
result of amazing genetics. I learned a
lot from them. Technique, structure,
exercise selection, but the biggest
lesson, the real breakthrough, was
recovery management under extreme loads.
At elite strength levels, heavy squats
and heavy deadlifts interfere with each
other. Their solution was to pair the
lifts on the same day and only push one
of them hard. One week, heavy squats
with light deadlifts. The next week,
heavy deadlifts with light squats. This
wasn't deloading, it was intelligent
long-term planning. In my opinion,
beginners and intermediates don't need
this level of recovery management
because they're not lifting heavy enough
for it to be a limiting factor yet. As
strength increases, the rules change.
You become a different person. The
methods that took you from intermediate
to advanced often fail to take you from
advanced to elite. I applied these
principles immediately. My squat went
from 260 kg to 360 kg in 2 years working
with Ernie senior. One of my strongest
athletes, Alex Godly Strong Simon, was a
super heavyweight. He became the number
one Australian powerlifter within 2
years of high-level strength training.
He squatted 435 kg in competition and
deadlifted 400 kg in training. This was
the result of using those exact
principles which gave me the confidence
to work with super heavyweight lifters
at the highest level. When I met Thor in
2016, he asked me one question. Would I
coach him to become the world's
strongest man? I said yes. I told him
that I'd make him stronger across the
board and take him to the top of the
sport. 2 years later in 2018, he didn't
just win the title,
>> [cheering]
>> And there it is. Putting on a show at
this point.
>> [cheering]
>> It is Hafthor Julius Björnsson.
And he's just going to take it all in
here.
>> [cheering]
>> He and Kieliszkowski say, "What the
heck, let's give it a try." On the final
stone, 460 lb. [cheering]
And Hafthor Julius Björnsson with the
icing on the cake.
His first ever World's Strongest Man
title. At long last, he [cheering] is at
the top of the podium. And he went on to
win every single major international
strongman competition that existed in
that year. He dominated the entire
season. After that, he took on what many
consider to be the ultimate benchmark of
strength, the deadlift world record. He
pulled 501 kg, breaking the record
previously held by Eddie Hall. That lift
became one of the most controversial
moments in strongman history. Can I ask
you a question? Who weighed the plates?
Your dad.
World record shouldn't not allowed.
That's like That's like Usain Bolt
running 100 m in a in a world record and
going, "Yeah, but we done it. We done
timed it."
Who sponsored it? Rogue. Whose bar was
it? Rogue. Whose plates was it? Rogue.
Whose Whose platform was it? Rogue. I'm
not saying Rogue is dodgy, but it's just
wrong that Rogue built that platform and
put everything together.
>> to yourself? Are you listening to
yourself? It was questioned, debated,
and criticized, and the rivalry only
intensified. Immediately after breaking
the record, Thor committed to settling
it directly. He stepped away from
strongman, dropped significant body
weight, and prepared [music] for a
boxing match with Eddie Hall.
>> [groaning and screaming]
>> But the controversy around the deadlift
never disappeared. Prove it.
I can't actually. Prove it. I will and
they will. 510
kg.
Ladies and gentlemen, there it
>> [screaming]
>> is.
Wow!
And the first thing that comes to mind
when you look at that
is the fact that that was
easy.
Ladies and gentlemen, look upon the
mountain. Look upon Hafthor Julius
Björnsson. He didn't just come back and
break the world record, he did it twice.
First, 505 kg, then 6 weeks later, 510
kg. And what matters most is he didn't
just break the record again, he won the
entire competition on the same day. A
world record deadlift followed by
overall victory in the competition
[music]
after that much time away from the
sport, that performance was arguably the
greatest single feat in strongman
performance history. Along the way, Thor
set many world records, many [music] of
which still stand today. His performance
across strongman, powerlifting, [music]
and deadlifting have led many to regard
him as arguably the strongest human in
history. That outcome wasn't [music]
luck. It was the result of understanding
principles, respecting progression, and
knowing when the rules change. That's
why I had the confidence to say yes, and
my hope is that the lessons that I've
shared with you give you the same
confidence to do exceptional things with
yourself and with the athletes that you
coach.